So, I was experimenting with Cursor and Kaggle competitions. I tried a HITL (human in the loop) technique, where I would have Cursor implement new findings and techniques, but I would audit the code and actively test different models and methods. At first, I tried the LGBM (light gradient boosting machine) model, but I actually found that a mix of Catboost and XGboost performed marginally better, thus I switched to that. Admittedly, I have yet to learn the finer differences between the models, but generally Catboost performs much better with categorical data, whereas LGBM is better at training models on large data sets. 

During my experimentation, I found that my model’s test accuracy would be as high as 81% (sometimes higher, though the average was around 0.81), yet my public Kaggle score would only ever score a maximum of 0.78. Keep in mind, the baseline score for just differentiating gender is 0.7606, so this was not enough for me. It was very strange though, how could my model be predicting such high accuracy on the test data but perform so poorly on the actual Kaggle data? This was when I learned about data leakage. Essentially, when there are unexpected correlations between the test set and the training set from which the model uses to make its predictions. This can artificially inflate the test data accuracy score, as the model would not have access to this information during prediction time in reality. Thus, you can think of it as “future data” leaking from the test set into the training set. This topic is better explained in David Recio’s blog (link below), but this was a very disappointing way to find out that my model’s true accuracy score was not as high as the test score was displaying.


So, how did I address this? I decided to remove some features because the data was leaking into the training set and was inflating my accuracy rate. Some features I chose to remove include 

Funnily enough, the solution that helped me increase my accuracy rate from 78% to 80.5% was actually a simple regression model. Ironically having too many features can create noise and confuse the model on what features are the most important to consider. It was kind of upsetting that the simple solution worked better than any complex model that I was working on, but it does make sense given that this dataset is particularly small. So, if you add too many features not only do you increase the noise but you also risk overfitting. 

Another interesting fact that I found interesting was that certain features were not very useful when considered alone, but the intersection of features created a more telling story. For example, family based on surnames may have just been noise if there were no other related features, but in reality there is much to interpret about this. Due to the women and children first policy, when the women travelling in the same group perished, it was almost certain that the man also died. Conversely, if the other men travelling in the same group survived, it was more likely that the man survived as well, as this implies that this group of men were rescued. Overall, I thought it was incredibly interesting that Cursor was able to pick out a few strong predictions about females who died and males who survived. This was able to push my Kaggle accuracy rate up slightly by a few percentages, which was wonderful. In terms of increasing accuracy, it’s easier to increase the accuracy by finding women who were more likely to have died instead of survived (against what the gender baseline predicts), compared to men who survived rather than died. If I had to make an educated guess, I would say it’s because the model overpredicted that more women survived due to the women and children first policy, but in reality, many women did not have the chance to be rescued, especially lower class women. While the model does assume that more men died than in reality, it was significantly less likely for a man to have survived the Titanic in general, therefore it’s easier to pick out cases of women who died (instead of lived) to increase accuracy ever so slightly compared to finding men who survived (instead of died). 

I didn’t explore feature engineering too much in this competition, mainly because I felt like there was too much data missing in the cabin numbers especially, so it would be hard for a beginner like me to estimate. But, I do recall stumbling upon this cool Kaggle post where the user even extracted data from the titles and used cabin numbers to access their proximity to the upper deck. I thought this was so creative and neat. I would’ve never thought to use titles like “master” (referring to a young boy) to determine a passenger’s age. What I love most about these competitions is that there is plenty of room for creativity. I’m excited to continue learning more. 


On a final note, if you ever attempt this competition, take note that the users with 1.0 are cheating and since the dataset is so small, they can search up who survived and who didn’t.  The point of a model is to predict and not to know for certain, so it’s highly unlikely for even a good model to have a perfect accuracy rate. For a beginners competition, anything above the baseline of 0.7606 is already a feat. But, more importantly this is just an introduction to become more skilled and interested in ML. 

While I could probably achieve a higher accuracy rate if I wanted to, I’m more interested in pursuing other competitions. My next project will be the House Price Kaggle competition and I look forward to refining my knowledge. 

https://david-recio.com/2022/04/11/titanic-leak.html#What-is-leakage?

