We went over K-nearest neighbors (KNN), Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, Support Vector Model (SVM) and also Neural Networks. She started with the simpler models before transitioning to the more complex ones, but Kylie made a great point that sometimes simpler models are actually more effective and they can take way less time to train and deploy. I find this interesting because when I study some of the top solutions in Kaggle, they almost always just employ a basic model. For example some of the higher solutions used logistic regression for the Titanic Kaggle competition. Their feature engineering supports their model and they also place heavy emphasis on EDA (I will be looking into this in my next post). It might be too early to make a conclusion, but I do feel like generally it’s not about flashy models, rather it’s about cleaning the data properly and also adding supporting features that don’t confuse the model.

Anyways, back to the models explained in the video. Firstly, let’s start with K-nearest neighbors. This model essentially looks at the point’s closest neighboring values and the model will make a judgement based on which points it is close to. In the example that she used, there are either negative or positive points (this is an example of a classification problem), so if the majority of the points are negative, then the model will predict that this point is also negative and vice versa. It only achieved a 67% accuracy rate in her run though, so perhaps this isn’t the most accurate model for her particular data set. It’s important to experiment and choose the best model for your data. 

Naive Bayes is a model that uses Bayes Theorem. Funnily enough, I studied this formula for my math IA (it’s an IB thing) in grade 11. It was about how probability and statistics can be used in the courtroom, since at the time I was interested in law. Funny how times change, but anyways, this formula relies on one key assumption (hence the name, “naive”), that all features are completely independent of one another. Bayes Theorem calculates the probability of something being true based on what we know, which means it’s relatively simple, but in the real world, many features are interconnected, which means that a more complex model may beat it in the real world. 

Logistic Regression is something I’ve seen in my intro statistics class before (STA130), it’s a very neat way to classify data. Even though it has "regression" in the name, it’s actually used for classification because we aren't predicting a continuous number (like a stock price), but rather a category (like "Buy" vs. "Sell"). The way it works is by taking a linear equation and turning it into a sigmoid function. This squishes any input value into a probability between 0 and 1. Instead of just a straight line that could go to infinity, you get that smooth S-curve. We use the Log-Odds (Logit) to transform the probability so we can actually map it to our linear predictors. Once the model spits out a probability, we apply a threshold (usually 0.5) to make the final call. So, for example, if the sigmoid function gives us a 0.56, that’s a 56% probability of being a 1. Since that’s higher than our 0.5 cutoff, the model "classifies" that point as a 1.

SVMs are very cool because they can achieve accuracy rates comparable to neural networks despite being way less complex. Essentially, the model works by creating a separating hyperplane, which is essentially a boundary line that divides your data into groups. Ideally, you want this hyperplane to have the maximum possible "buffer" (margin) on either side, so it isn't touching any points and sits perfectly in the middle of the two groups. Once that boundary is set, the classification is straightforward: depending on which side of the hyperplane a new point falls on, the model classifies it accordingly.

Neural networks are a really cool model that I heard my brother mention. They’re kind of structured like a brain, in that they have layers of neurons to pass along information.
- Input Layer: The raw data goes in.
- Hidden Layers: Where the "mathy stuff" happens (this is the "Deep" part of Deep ML).
- Output Layer: You get your final result.
I think they’re awesome because they can learn super complex patterns (like images or voice), they’re also massive data-hogs and take forever to train. So, the trade-offs will always be there. 

Back to the note of loss that she talked about. It is essentially the amount of variables that the machine predicts incorrectly. As we keep training our model using our training data and validation (often a 60, 20 and 20 split between training, validation and test), we expect the loss to decrease and the accuracy to increase. 
